The following is a conversation with Elon Musk.
His third time on this, the Lex Friedman podcast.
Yeah, make yourself comfortable.
Boo.
No, wow, okay.
Do you don't do the headphones thing?
No.
Okay.
I mean, how close do I get?
I need to get to this thing.
The closer you are, the sexier you sound.
Hey, babe.
Yep.
Can't get enough of the all that, baby.
I'm gonna clip that out anytime somebody messaged me about it.
Yeah, you want my body.
And you think I'm sexy.
Come right out and tell me so.
Do, do, do, do, do.
So good.
Okay.
Serious mode activate.
All right.
Serious mode.
Come on, you're Russian, you can be serious.
Yeah, I know.
Everyone's serious all the time in Russia.
Yeah.
We'll get there.
It's gotten soft.
Allow me to say that the SpaceX launch
of human beings to orbit on May 30th, 2020
was seen by many as the first step
in a new era of human space exploration.
These human spaceflight missions were a beacon of hope
to me and to millions over the past two years
as our world has been going through
one of the most difficult periods in recent human history.
We saw, we see the rise of division, fear, cynicism,
and the loss of common humanity,
right when it is needed most.
So first, Elon, let me say thank you
for giving the world hope and reason
to be excited about the future.
Oh, it's kind of you to say.
I do want to do that.
Humanity has obviously a lot of issues
and people at times do bad things,
but despite all that, I love humanity
and I think we should make sure we do everything
we can to have a good future and an exciting future
and one where that maximizes the happiness of the people.
Let me ask about Crew Dragon demo two.
So that first flight with humans on board,
how did you feel leading up to that launch?
Were you scared?
Were you excited?
Was it going through your mind?
So much was at stake.
Yeah, no, that was extremely stressful, no question.
We obviously could not let them down in any way.
So extremely stressful, I'd say, to say the least.
I was confident that at the time that we launched,
that no one could think of anything at all to do
that would improve the probability of success
and we racked our brains to think of any possible way
to improve the probability of success.
We could not think of anything more and nor could NASA
and so that's just the best that we could do.
So then we went ahead and launched.
Now, I'm not a religious person, but I nonetheless
got on my knees and prayed for that mission.
Were you able to sleep?
No.
How did it feel when it was a success?
First, when the launch was a success
and when they returned back home or back to Earth?
It was a great relief.
Yeah, for high stress situations,
I find it's not so much elation as relief.
And I think once, as we got more comfortable and proved out
the systems, because we really got to make sure everything
works, it was definitely a lot more enjoyable
with the subsequent astronaut missions.
And I thought the inspiration mission was actually
very inspiring, the inspiration for mission.
I'd encourage people to watch the inspiration
documentary on Netflix.
It's actually really good.
And it really isn't.
I was actually inspired by that.
And so that one, I felt I was able to enjoy the actual mission
and not just be super stressed all the time.
So for people that somehow don't know,
it's the all civilian first time, all civilian out
to space, out to orbit.
Yeah, and it was, I think, the highest orbit
that in like 30 or 40 years or something.
The only one that was higher was the one shuttle, sorry,
Hubble servicing mission.
And then before that, it would have been Apollo in 72.
It's pretty wild.
So it's cool.
And I think as a species, we want
to be continuing to do better and reach higher ground.
And I think it would be extremely tragic
if Apollo was the high watermark for humanity.
And that's as far as we ever got.
And it's concerning that here we are, 49 years
after the last mission to the moon.
And so almost half a century, and we've not been back.
And that's worrying.
It's like, does that mean we've peaked as a civilization
or what?
So I think we've got to get back to the moon
and build a base there, a science base.
I think we could learn a lot about the nature of the universe
if we have a proper science base on the moon.
Like we have a science base in Antarctica
and many other parts of the world.
And so that's the next big thing.
We've got to have a serious moon base
and then get people to Mars and get out there
and be a space bearing civilization.
I'll ask you about some of those details.
But since you're so busy with the hard engineering
challenges of everything that's involved,
are you still able to marvel at the magic of it all,
of space travel, of every time the rocket goes up,
especially when it's a crewed mission?
Or are you just so overwhelmed with all the challenges
that you have to solve?
And actually, to add to that, the reason
that I wanted to ask this question of May 30th,
it's been some time.
So you can look back and think about the impact already.
It's already, at the time, it was an engineering problem,
maybe.
Now it's becoming a historic moment.
Like it's a moment that, how many moments
would be remembered about the 21st century?
To me, that or something like that,
maybe inspiration for one of those
would be remembered as the early steps of a new age
of space exploration.
Yeah, I mean, during the launches itself,
so I think maybe some people will know,
but a lot of people don't know.
It's like, I'm actually the chief engineer of SpaceX.
So I've signed off on pretty much all the design decisions.
And so if there's something that goes wrong with that,
a vehicle, it's fundamentally my fault.
So I'm really just thinking about all the things that.
So when I see the rocket, I see all the things
that could go wrong and the things that could be better.
And the same with the Dragon spacecraft,
it's like, a lot of people will say, oh, this
is a spacecraft or a rocket.
And this looks really cool.
I'm like, I've like a readout of like, these are the risks.
These are the problems.
That's what I see.
Like, tch, tch, tch, tch, tch, tch.
So it's not what other people see when they see the product.
So let me ask you then to analyze Starship in that same way.
I know you'll talk about it in more detail about Starship
in the near future, perhaps.
Yeah, we'll talk about it now if you want.
But just in that same way, like you said,
you see when you see a rocket, you see a list of risks.
In that same way, you said that Starship
was a really hard problem.
So there's many ways I can ask this.
But if you magically could solve one problem perfectly,
one engineering problem perfectly, which one would it be?
On Starship?
Sorry, on Starship.
So is it maybe related to the efficiency, the engine,
the weight of the different components, the complexity
of various things, maybe the controls of the crazy thing
as to do the land?
Oh, actually, by far, the biggest thing absorbing my time
is engine production, not the design of the engine.
I've often said prototypes are easy, production is hard.
So we have the most advanced rocket engine
that's ever been designed.
Because I say currently the best rocket engine ever
is probably the RD180 or RD170, the Dora Russian engine,
basically.
And still, I think an engine should only count
if it's gotten something to orbit.
So our engine has not gotten anything to orbit yet.
But it is.
It's the first engine that's actually
better than the Russian RD engines,
which were an amazing design.
So you're talking about Raptor engine.
What makes it amazing?
What are the different aspects of it that make it?
What do you get the most excited about
if the whole thing works in terms of efficiency,
all those kinds of things?
Well, it's, but Raptor is a full flow staged combustion
engine, and it's operating at a very high chamber pressure.
So one of the key figures perhaps the key figure of merit
is what is the chamber pressure at which the rocket engine
can operate?
That's the combustion chamber pressure.
So Raptor is designed to operate at 300 bar, possibly
maybe higher, 300 atmospheres.
So the record right now for operational engine
is the RD engine that I mentioned, the Russian RD, which
is, I believe, around 267 bar.
And the difficulty of the chamber pressure
is increases on a nonlinear basis.
So 10% more chamber pressure is more like 50%, more difficult.
But that chamber pressure, that is
what allows you to get a very high power
density for the engine.
So enabling a very high thrust to weight ratio
and a very high specific impulse.
So specific impulse is like a measure
of the efficiency of a rocket engine.
It's really the effect of exhaust
velocity of the gas coming out of the engine.
So with a very high chamber pressure,
you can have a compact engine that nonetheless
has a high expansion ratio, which
is the ratio between the exit nozzle and the throat.
So you see a rocket engine's got sort of like a hourglass shape.
It's like a chamber and then it necks down and there's a nozzle.
And the ratio of the exit diameter
to the throat is the expansion ratio.
So why is it such a hard engine to manufacture at scale?
It's very complex.
So what is complexity mean here?
There's a lot of components involved.
There's a lot of components and a lot of unique materials.
So we had to invent several alloys
that don't exist in order to make this engine work.
So it's a materials problem, too.
It's a materials problem.
And in a full flow stage combustion,
there are many feedback loops in the system.
So basically, you've got propellants and hot gas
flowing simultaneously to so many different places on the engine.
And they all have a recursive effect on each other.
So you change one thing here.
It has a recursive effect here.
It changes something over there.
And it's quite hard to control.
Like there's a reason no one's made this before.
But the reason we're doing a stage combustion full flow
is because it has the highest theoretical possible efficiency.
So in order to make a fully reusable rocket,
that's really the holy grail of orbital rocketry.
You have to have everything's got to be the best.
It's got to be the best engine, the best airframe,
the best heat shield, extremely light avionics,
very clever control mechanisms.
You've got to shed mass in any possible way that you can.
For example, instead of putting landing legs on the booster
and ship, we are going to catch them with a tower
to save the weight of the landing legs.
So that's like, I mean, we're talking
about catching the largest flying object ever made
with on a giant tower with chopstick arms.
It's like a karate kid with the fly, but much bigger.
This probably won't work the first time.
Anyway, so this is bananas.
This is banana stuff.
So you mentioned that you doubt, well, not you doubt,
but there's days or moments when you doubt
that this is even possible.
It's so difficult.
The possible part is, well, at this point,
I think we will get Starship to work.
This is a question of timing.
How long will it take us to do this?
How long will it take us to actually achieve
full and rapid reusability?
Because it will take probably many launches
before we are able to have full and rapid reusability.
But I can say that the physics pencils out, like we're not,
at this point, I'd say we're confident that, like let's say,
I'm very confident success is in the set
of all possible outcomes.
It's not an all set.
For a while there, I was not convinced
that success was in the set of possible outcomes, which
is very important, actually.
But so we were saying there's a chance.
I'm saying there's a chance, exactly.
Just not sure how long it will take.
We have a very talented team.
They're working night and day to make it happen.
And like I said, the critical thing
to achieve for the revolution in spaceflight
and for humanity to be a space frame civilization
is to have a fully and rapidly reusable rocket,
orbital rocket.
There's not even been any orbital rocket that's
been fully reusable ever.
And this has always been the holy grail of rocketry.
And many smart people, very smart people,
have tried to do this before and have not succeeded.
So because it's such a hard problem.
What's your source of belief in situations like this?
When the engineering problem is so difficult,
there's a lot of experts, many of whom
you admire who have failed in the past.
Yes.
And a lot of people, a lot of experts, maybe journalists,
all the kind of the public in general,
have a lot of doubt about whether it's possible.
And you yourself know that even if it's
a non null set, non empty set of success,
it's still unlikely or very difficult.
Like where do you go to?
Both personally, intellectually as an engineer,
as a team, like for source of strength,
needed to sort of persevere through this
and to keep going with the project,
take it to completion.
It's also strength.
It doesn't really know how I think about things.
I mean, for me, it's simply this is something
that is important to get done.
And we should just keep doing it or die trying.
And I don't need source of strength.
So quitting is not even like.
That's not in my nature.
And I don't care about optimism or pessimism.
Fuck that, we're going to get it done.
Going to get it done.
Can you then zoom back in to specific problems
with starship or any engineering problems you work on?
Can you try to introspect your particular biological
and neural network, your thinking process
and describe how you think through problems,
the different engineering and design problems?
Is there like a systematic process you've
spoken about first principles thinking,
but is there a kind of process to it?
Well, like saying like physics is low
and everything else is a recommendation.
Like I've met a lot of people that can break the law,
but I haven't met anyone who could break physics.
So for any kind of technology problem,
you have to just make sure you're not violating physics.
And first principles analysis, I think,
is something that could be applied to really
any walk of life, anything really.
It's really just saying, let's boil something down
to the most fundamental principles.
The things that we are most confident
are true at a foundational level.
And that sets your axiomatic base.
And then you reason up from there.
And then you cross check your conclusion
against the axiomatic truths.
So some basics in physics would be like,
are you violating conservation of energy or momentum
or something like that?
Then it's not going to work.
So that's just to establish, is it possible?
And another good physics tool is thinking
about things in the limit.
If you take a particular thing and you scale it
to a very large number or to a very small number,
how do things change?
Well, it's like in number of things you manufacture,
something like that, and then in time.
Yeah, let's say you take an example of manufacturing, which
I think is just a very underrated problem.
And like I said, it's much harder
to take an advanced technology product
and bring it into volume manufacturing
than it is to design it in the first place.
My orders of magnitude.
So let's say you're trying to figure out
why is this part or product expensive?
Is it because of something fundamentally foolish
that we're doing?
Or is it because our volume is too low?
And then you say, OK, well, what if our volume was
a million units a year?
Is it still expensive?
That's what I'm thinking about things in the limit.
If it's still expensive at a million units a year,
then volume is not the reason why your thing is expensive.
There's something fundamental about design.
And then you then can focus on reducing complexity
or something like that in the design?
Change the design to change the part to be something
that is not fundamentally expensive.
That's a common thing in rocketry,
because the unit volume is relatively low.
And so a common excuse would be, well,
it's expensive because our unit volume is low.
And if we were in automotive or something like that
or consumer electronics, then our costs would be lower.
And I'm like, OK, so let's say now you're
making a million units a year.
Is it still expensive?
If the answer is yes, then economies of scale are not
the issue.
Do you throw into manufacturing?
Do you throw like supply chain?
Talk about resources and materials and stuff like that.
Do you throw that into the calculation
of trying to reason from first principles
like how we're going to make the supply chain work here?
Yeah, yeah.
And then the cost of materials, things like that.
Or is that too much?
Exactly, so another good example of thinking about things
in the limit is if you take any product, any machine,
or whatever, take a rocket or whatever
and say, if you look at the raw materials in the rocket,
so you're going to have aluminum, steel, titanium, incanal,
specialty alloys, copper.
And you say, what's the weight of the constituent elements
of each of these elements?
And what is their raw material value?
And that sets the asymptotic limit
for how low the cost of the vehicle
can be unless you change the materials.
And then when you do that, I call it maybe the magic one
number or something like that.
So that would be if you had just a pile of these raw materials
here and you could wave the magic one
and rearrange the atoms into the final shape,
that would be the lowest possible cost
that you could make this thing for
unless you change the materials.
So then, and that is always almost always a very low number.
So then what's actually causing these to be expensive
is how you put the atoms into the desired shape.
Yeah, actually, if you don't mind me taking a tiny tangent,
I often talk to Jim Keller, who's
somebody who worked with you as a friend.
Jim was a great work at Tesla.
So I suppose he carries the flame of the same kind
of thinking that you're talking about now.
And I guess I see that same thing at Tesla and SpaceX folks
who worked there, they kind of learned this way of thinking.
And it kind of becomes obvious almost.
But anyway, I had argument, not argument,
he educated me about how cheap it
might be to manufacture a Tesla bot.
We just, we had an argument, how can you
reduce the cost of the scale of producing a robot?
Because I've gotten a chance to interact quite a bit,
obviously, in the academic circles with human robots
and the Boston Dynamics and stuff like that.
And they're very expensive to build.
And then Jim kind of schooled me on saying, OK,
this kind of first principles thinking
of how can we get the cost of manufacturing down?
I suppose you do that, you have done that kind of thinking
for Tesla bot and for all kinds of complex systems that
are traditionally seen as complex.
And you say, OK, how can we simplify everything now?
Yeah, I mean, I think if you are really good at manufacturing,
you can basically make at high volume,
you can basically make anything for a cost
that asymptotically approaches the raw material value
of the constituents, plus any intellectual property
that you need to do license.
Anything.
But it's hard.
It's not like that's a very hard thing to do,
but it is possible for anything.
Anything in volume can be made, like I said,
for a cost that asymptotically approaches
its raw material constituents, plus intellectual property
license rights.
So what will often happen in trying to design a product
is people will start with the tools and parts and methods
that they are familiar with and then try
to create a product using their existing tools and methods.
The other way to think about it is actually
imagine the try to imagine the platonic ideal of the perfect
product or technology, whatever it might be.
And so what is the perfect arrangement of atoms
that would be the best possible product?
And now let us try to figure out how
to get the atoms in that shape.
I mean, it sounds almost like Rick and Morty
absurd until you start to really think about it.
And you really should think about it in this way,
because everything else is kind of,
if you think you might fall victim
to the momentum of the way things were done in the past,
unless you think in this way.
Well, just as a function of inertia,
people will want to use the same tools and methods
that they are familiar with.
That's what they'll do by default.
And then that will lead to an outcome of things
that can be made with those tools and methods,
that is unlikely to be the platonic ideal of the perfect
product.
So that's why it's good to think of things in both directions.
They're like, what can we build with the tools that we have?
But also, what is the theoretical perfect product look like?
And that theoretical perfect product
is going to be a moving target, because as you learn more,
the definition for that perfect product will change,
because you don't actually know what the perfect product is,
but you can successfully approximate a more perfect
product.
So think about it like that, and then saying, OK, now,
what tools, methods, materials, whatever
do we need to create in order to get the atoms in that shape?
But people rarely think about it that way.
But it's a powerful tool.
I should mention that the brilliant Siobhan Zillis is
hanging out with us, in case you hear
a voice of wisdom from outside, from up above.
OK, so let me ask you about Mars.
You mentioned it would be great for science
to put a base on the moon to do some research.
But the truly big leap, again, in this category
of seemingly impossible, is to put a human being on Mars.
When do you think SpaceX will land a human being on Mars?
Hmm.
Best case is about five years, worst case, 10 years.
What are the determining factors,
would you say, from an engineering perspective,
or is that not the bottlenecks?
You know, it's fundamentally engineering the vehicle.
I mean, Starship is the most complex and advanced rocket
that's ever been made by, I don't know,
water magnitude or something like that.
It's a lot.
It's really next level.
So, and the fundamental optimization of Starship
is minimizing cost per ton to orbit,
and ultimately cost per ton to the surface of Mars.
This may seem like a Mugantile objective,
but it is actually the thing that needs to be optimized.
Like, there is a certain cost per ton to the surface of Mars
where we can afford to establish a self sustaining city.
And then above that, we cannot afford to do it.
So, right now, you couldn't fly to Mars for a trillion dollars.
There's no amount of money could get you a ticket to Mars.
So, we need to get that above, you know,
to get that like something that is actually possible at all.
But then, that's, we don't just want to have, you know,
with Mars flags and footprints,
and then not come back for a half century
like we did with the moon.
In order to pass a very important great filter,
I think, we need to be a multi planet species.
That may sound somewhat esoteric to a lot of people,
but eventually, given enough time,
there's something,
Earth is likely to experience some calamity
that could be something that humans do to themselves
or an external event like happen to the dinosaurs.
And eventually, if none of that happens,
and somehow, magically, we keep going,
then the sun will, the sun is gradually expanding
and will engulf the Earth.
And probably Earth gets too hot for life
in about 500 million years.
It's a long time, but that's only 10% longer
than Earth has been around.
And so, if you think about like the current situation,
it's really remarkable and kind of hard to believe,
but Earth's been around 4.5 billion years,
and this is the first time in 4.5 billion years
that it's been possible to extend life beyond Earth.
And that window of charity may be open for a long time,
and I hope it is, but it also may be open for a short time.
And I think it was wise for us to act quickly
while the window is open, just in case it closes.
Yeah, the existence of nuclear weapons, pandemics,
all kinds of threats should kind of give us some motivation.
I mean, civilization could die with a bang or a whimper.
If it dies, a demographic collapse,
then it's more of a whimper, obviously.
But if it's World War III, it's more of a bang.
But these are all risks.
I mean, it's important to think of these things
and just think of things as probabilities, not certainties.
There's a probability that something bad will happen on Earth.
I think most likely the future will be good.
But there's, let's say, for argument's sake,
a 1% chance per century of a civilization ending event.
Like, that was Stephen Hawking's estimate.
I think he might be right about that.
So then we should basically think of this
like being a multiplanet species is like taking out
insurance for life itself.
Like, life insurance?
For life.
Well, it's turned into an infomercial real quick.
Life insurance for life, yes.
And we can bring the creatures from plants and animals
from Earth to Mars and breathe life into the planet
and have a second planet with life.
That would be great.
They can't bring themselves there.
So if we don't bring them to Mars,
then they will just for sure all die when the sun expands anyway.
And then that'll be it.
What do you think is the most difficult aspect of building
a civilization on Mars, terraforming Mars,
like from an engineering perspective,
from a financial perspective, human perspective,
to get a large number of folks there who will never return
back to Earth?
No, they could certainly return.
Some will return back to Earth.
They will choose to stay there for the rest of their lives.
Many will.
But we need the spaceships back, like the ones that go to Mars.
We need them back.
So you can hop on if you want.
But we can't just not have the spaceships come back.
Those things are expensive.
We need them back.
I'd like to come back after the trip.
I mean, do you think about the terraforming aspect,
like actually building?
Are you so focused right now on the spaceships part that's
so critical to get to Mars?
We absolutely, if you can't get there, nothing else matters.
And like I said, we can't get there at some extraordinarily
high cost.
I mean, the current cost of, let's say,
one ton to the surface of Mars is on the order of $1 billion.
So because you don't just need the rocket and the launch
and everything, you need like heat shield, you need guidance
system, you need deep space communications,
you need some kind of landing system.
So like rough approximation would
be $1 billion per ton to the surface of Mars right now.
This is obviously way too expensive
to create a self sustaining civilization.
So we need to improve that by at least a factor of 1,000.
A million per ton?
Yes, ideally much less than a million ton.
But if it's not, like it's got to be,
obviously like how much can society afford to spend
or just want to spend on a self sustaining city on Mars?
The self sustaining part is important.
Like it's just the key threshold,
the great filter will have been passed
when the city on Mars can survive even if the spaceships
from Earth stop coming for any reason.
It doesn't matter what the reason is.
But if they stop coming for any reason,
will it die out or will it not?
And if there's even one critical ingredient missing,
then it still doesn't count.
It's like if you're in a long sea voyage
and you've got everything except vitamin C,
and it's only a matter of time, you know, you're going to die.
So we're going to get Mars, a Mars city to the point
where it's self sustaining.
I'm not sure this will really happen in my lifetime,
but I hope to see it at least have a lot of momentum.
And then you could say, what is the minimum tonnage
necessary to have a self sustaining city?
And there's a lot of uncertainty about this.
You could say like, I don't know,
it's probably at least a million tons.
Because you have to set up a lot of infrastructure on Mars.
Like I said, you can't be missing anything
that in order to be self sustaining, you can't be missing.
Like you need a sand baking doctor, fabs,
you need iron ore refineries, like you need lots of things.
So, and Mars is not super hospitable.
It's the least inhospitable planet,
but it's definitely a fixer of a planet.
Outside of Earth.
Yes.
Earth is pretty good.
Earth is like easy.
And also we should clarify in the solar system.
Yes, in the solar system.
There might be nice like vacation spots.
There might be some great planets out there, but it's hopeless.
Too hard to get there?
Yeah, way, way, way, way too hard to say the least.
Let me push back on that.
Not really a pushback, but a quick curve ball of a question.
So you did mention physics as the first starting point.
So general relativity allows for warm holes.
They technically can exist.
Do you think those can ever be leveraged by humus
to travel fast in the speed of light?
Well, the one whole thing is debatable.
We currently do not know of any means of going fast
in the speed of light.
There are some ideas about having space.
So you can only move at the speed of light through space,
but if you can make space itself move,
that's what we're warming space.
Space is capable of moving faster than the speed of light.
Like the universe, in the Big Bang,
the universe expanded much more than the speed of light by a lot.
If this is possible, the amount of energy
required to walk space is so gigantic, it boggles the mind.
So all the work you've done with propulsion,
how much innovation is possible with rocket propulsion?
Is this, I mean, you've seen it all,
and you're constantly innovating in every aspect.
How much is possible?
Like, how much can you get 10x somehow?
Is there something in there in physics
that you can get significant improvement in terms
of efficiency of engines and all those kinds of things?
Well, as I was saying, really the Holy Grail
is a fully and rapidly reusable orbital system.
So right now, the Falcon 9 is the only reusable rocket out
there, but the booster comes back and lands,
and you've seen the videos, and we get the nose
cone fairing back, but we do not get the upper stage back.
So that means that we have a minimum cost
of building an upper stage.
You can think of like a two stage rocket of sort
of like two airplanes, like a big airplane
and a small airplane, and we get the big airplane back,
but not the small airplane.
And so it still costs a lot.
So that upper stage is at least $10 million.
And then the degree of the booster is not as rapidly
and completely reusable as we'd like in order of the fairings.
So our kind of minimum marginal cost, not counting overhead,
for per flight is on the order of $15 to $20 million maybe.
So that's extremely good for, it's by far better
than any rocket ever in history.
But with full and rapid reusability,
we can reduce the cost per ton to orbit by a factor of 100.
Just think of it like imagine if you had an aircraft
or something or a car.
And if you had to buy in your car every time
you went for a drive, it would be very expensive,
every silly, frankly.
But in fact, you just refuel the car or recharge the car.
And that makes your trip, I don't know, 1,000 times cheaper.
So it's the same for rockets.
It's very difficult to make this complex machine that
can go to orbit.
And so if you cannot reuse it and have
to throw even any significant part of it away,
that massively increases the cost.
So Starship, in theory, could do a cost per launch of like
a million, maybe $2 million or something like that
and put over 100 tons in orbit, which is crazy.
Yeah, that's incredible.
So you're saying like it's by far the biggest bank for the block
is to make it fully reusable versus like some kind
of brilliant breakthrough in theoretical physics?
Yeah, no.
There's no brilliant break.
No, just make the rocket reusable.
This is an extremely difficult engineering problem.
Got it.
But no new physics is required.
Just brilliant engineering.
Let me ask a slightly philosophical, fun question.
Got to ask.
I know you're focused on getting to Mars,
but once we're there on Mars, what do you
what form of government, economic system, political system
do you think would work best for an early civilization
of humans?
I mean, the interesting reason to talk about this stuff,
it also helps people dream about the future.
I know you're really focused about the short term
engineering dream, but it's like, I don't know.
There's something about imagining an actual civilization
on Mars that gives people, really gives people help.
Well, it would be a new frontier and an opportunity
to rethink the whole nature of government, just
as was done in the creation of the United States.
So I mean, I would suggest having direct democracy,
like people vote directly on things,
as opposed to representative democracy.
So representative democracy, I think,
is too subject to a special interest
and a coercion of the politicians and that kind of thing.
So I'd recommend that there's just direct democracy.
People vote on laws.
The population votes on laws themselves.
And then the laws must be short enough
that people can understand them.
Yeah, and then keeping a well informed populist,
really being transparent about all the information,
about what they're voting for.
Absolutely transparency.
Yeah.
And not make it as annoying as those cookies
where you have to accept the cookies.
Accept cookies.
Like always, there's always a slight amount of trepidation
when you click accept cookies.
Like, I feel as though there's, perhaps,
a very tiny chance that it'll open a portal to hell
or something like that.
That's exactly how I feel.
Why do they want me to accept that?
What do they want with this cookie?
Like, somebody got upset with accepting cookies or something
somewhere.
Who cares?
So annoying to keep accepting all these cookies.
To me, this is just a grand accept.
Yes, you can have my damn cookie.
I don't care.
Whatever.
He heard it from me on first.
He accepts all your damn cookies.
Yeah.
It's not asking me.
It's annoying.
Yeah, it's one example of implementation
of a good idea done really horribly.
Yeah, it's somebody who has some good intentions
of privacy or whatever.
But now, everyone just has to accept cookies.
And it's not, you know, you have billions of people
who have to keep clicking accept cookie.
It's super annoying.
Then we just accept the damn cookie.
It's fine.
There is, I think, a fundamental problem
that we're, because we've not really had a major,
like a world war or something like that in a while.
And obviously, we'd like to not have world wars.
There's not been a cleansing function
for rules and regulations.
So wars did have some sort of lining
in that there would be a reset on rules and regulations
after a war.
So World War I and II, there were huge resets
on rules and regulations.
Now, if society does not have a war
and there's no cleansing function or garbage collection
for rules and regulations, then rules and regulations
will accumulate every year, because they're immortal.
There's no actual humans die, but the laws don't.
So we need a garbage collection function
for rules and regulations.
They should not just be immortal,
because some of the rules and regulations that are put in place
will be counterproductive, done with good intentions,
but counterproductive.
Sometimes not done with good intentions.
So if rules and regulations just accumulate every year
and you get more and more of them,
then eventually you won't be able to do anything.
You're just like Gulliver tied down
by thousands of little strings.
And we see that in US and basically all economies
that have been around for a while,
and regulators and legislators
create new rules and regulations every year,
but they don't put effort into removing them.
And I think that's very important that we put effort
into removing rules and regulations.
But it gets tough, because you get special interests
that then are dependent on, like they have a vested interest
in that whatever rule and regulation,
and then they fight to not get it removed.
Yeah, so I mean, I guess the problem with the Constitution
is it's kind of like C versus Java,
because it doesn't have any garbage collection built in.
I think there should be,
when you first said the metaphor of garbage collection,
I loved it.
For the coding standpoint.
For the coding standpoint, yeah, yeah.
It would be interesting if the laws themselves
kind of had a built in thing where they kind of die
after a while and somebody explicitly publicly defends them.
So that's sort of, it's not like somebody has to kill them,
they kind of die themselves, they disappear.
Yeah.
Not to defend Java or anything,
but the C++, you could also have a great garbage collection
in Python and so on.
Yeah, so yeah, something needs to happen,
or just the civilization's already just hardened over time.
And you can just get less and less done
because there's just a rule against everything.
So I think like, I don't know, for Mars,
whatever I say, I would say for Earth as well,
like I think there should be an active process
for removing rules and regulations
and questioning their existence.
Just like, if we've got a function
for creating rules and regulations,
because rules and regulations can also think of as like,
they're like software or lines of code
for operating civilization.
That's the rules and regulations.
So it's not like we shouldn't have rules and regulations,
but you have code accumulation, but no code removal.
And so it just gets to become basically
archaic bloatware after a while.
And it's just, it makes it hard for things to progress.
So I don't know, maybe Mars, you'd have like any given law
must have a sunset and require active voting
to keep it up there, you know?
And I should also say like, and these are just,
I don't know, recommendations or thoughts,
and ultimately we'll be up to the people in Mars
to decide, but I think it should be easier
to remove a law than to add one
because of the, just to overcome the inertia of laws.
So maybe it's like, for argument's sake,
you need like say 60% vote to have a law take effect,
but only a 40% vote to remove it.
So let me be the guy, you posted a meme on Twitter recently
where there's like a row of urinals
and guy just walks all the way across
and he tells you about crypto.
I mean, that's happened to be so many times,
I think maybe even literally.
Yeah.
Do you think, technologically speaking,
there's any room for ideas of smart contracts or so on,
because you mentioned laws,
that's an interesting use of things like smart contracts
to implement the laws by which governments function.
And like something built on Ethereum
or maybe a dog coin that enables smart contracts somehow.
I don't quite understand this whole smart contract thing.
I mean, I'm too down to understand smart contracts.
That's a good line.
I mean, my general approach to any kind of like deal
or whatever is just make sure there's clarity of understanding.
That's the most important thing.
And just keep any kind of deal very, very short
and simple, plain language.
And just make sure everyone understands this is the deal.
Is everyone, is it clear?
And what are the consequences
if various things don't happen?
But usually deals are business deals or whatever
are way too long and complex and overly lawyered.
And pointlessly.
You mentioned that Doge is the people's coin.
And you said that you were literally going SpaceX,
may consider literally putting a Doge coin on the moon.
Is this something you're still considering Mars perhaps?
Do you think there's some chance
we've talked about political systems on Mars
that Doge coin is the official currency of Mars
at some point in the future?
Well, I think Mars itself will need to have
a different currency because you can't synchronize
due to speed of light or not easily.
So it must be completely standalone from Earth?
Well, yeah, because Mars is at closest approach,
it's four light minutes away roughly.
And then at most approach,
it's roughly 20 light minutes away, maybe a little more.
So you can't really have something synchronizing.
You know, if you've got a 20 minutes speed of light issue,
if it's got a one minute block chain,
it's not gonna synchronize probably.
So Mars, I don't know if Mars would have a crypto currency
as a thing, but probably seems likely,
but it would be some kind of localized thing on Mars.
And you let the people decide?
Yeah, absolutely.
The future of Mars should be up to the Martians.
Yeah, so I mean, I think the crypto currency thing
is an interesting approach to reducing the error
in the database that is called money.
You know, I think I have a pretty deep understanding
of what money actually is on a practical day to day basis
because of PayPal.
You know, we really got in deep there.
And right now the money system,
actually for practical purposes,
is really a bunch of heterogeneous mainframes
running old cobalt.
Okay, you mean literally?
Literally.
Literally what's happening.
In batch mode.
Okay, in batch mode.
Yeah, pretty the poor bastards
who have to maintain that code.
Okay, that's a pain.
Not even Fortran, it's cobalt, yep.
It's cobalt.
And the banks are still buying mainframes in 2021
and running ancient cobalt code.
And the Federal Reserve is probably even older
than what the banks have
and they have an old cobalt mainframe.
And so now, and so the government effectively
has editing privileges on the money database.
And they use those editing privileges
to make more money whenever they want.
And this increases the error in the database that is money.
So I think money should really be viewed
through the lens of information theory.
And so it's, you're kind of like an internet connection.
Like what's the bandwidth, you know, total bit rate?
What is the latency, jitter, packet drop,
you know, errors in network communication?
Just think of money like that, basically.
I think that's probably why we really think of it.
And then say what system
from an information theory standpoint
allows an economy to function the best.
And, you know, crypto is an attempt to reduce the error
in money that is contributed by governments
diluting the money supply
as basically a pernicious form of taxation.
So both policy in terms of with inflation and actual,
like technological cobalt, like cryptocurrency
takes us into the 21st century
in terms of the actual systems
that allow you to do the transaction,
to store wealth, all those kinds of things.
Like I said, just think of money as information.
People often will think of money
as having power in and of itself.
It does not.
Money is information.
And it does not have power in and of itself.
Like, you know, applying the physics tools
of thinking about things in the limit is helpful.
If you are stranded on a tropical island
and you have a trillion dollars, it's useless.
Because there's no resource allocation.
Money is a database for resource allocation.
If there's no resource to allocate except yourself.
So money is useless.
If you're stranded on a desert island with no food,
all the Bitcoin in the world will not stop you from starving.
So just think of money as a database
for resource allocation across time and space.
And then what system in what form should that database
or data system, what would be most effective?
Now, there is a fundamental issue with, say, Bitcoin
in its current form in that the transaction volume
is very limited.
And the latency for a properly confirmed transaction
is too long, much longer than you'd like.
So it's actually not great from a transaction volume
standpoint or a latency standpoint.
So it is perhaps useful to solve an aspect
of the money database problem,
which is the sort of store of wealth
or an accounting of relative obligations, I suppose.
But it is not useful as a currency,
as a day to day currency.
But people have proposed different technological solutions.
Like Lightning.
Yeah, Lightning Network and the layer two technologies
on top of that.
I mean, it's all, it seems to be all kind of a trade off.
But the point is, it's kind of brilliant to say
that just think about it information,
think about what kind of database,
what kind of infrastructure enables
the exchange of information.
Like if you're operating in an economy,
and you need to have some thing that allows
for the efficient, to have efficient value ratios
between products and services.
So you've got this massive number of products
and services and you need to, you can't just barter.
It's like, that would be extremely unwieldy.
So you need something that gives you a ratio of exchange
between goods and services.
And then something that allows you to shift obligations
across time, like debt, debt and equity,
shift obligations across time.
Then what does the best job of that?
Part of the reason why I think there's some
marriage to dogecoin, even though it was obviously created
as a joke, is that it actually does have
a much higher transaction volume capability than Bitcoin.
And the costs of doing a transaction,
the dogecoin fee is very low.
Like right now, if you want to do a Bitcoin transaction,
the price of doing that transaction is very high.
So you could not use it effectively for most things.
And nor could it even scale to a high volume.
And when Bitcoin started, I guess around 2008
or something like that, the internet connections
were much worse than they are today.
Like order of magnitude, I mean, there's the way,
way worse in 2008.
So like having a small block size or whatever
is, and a long synchronization time
is made sense in 2008.
But to 2021 or fast forward 10 years,
it's like, it's like comically low, it's a,
so, and I think there's some value
to having a linear increase in the amount of currency
that is generated.
So because some amount of the currency,
like if a currency is too deflationary or like,
or should say if a currency is expected
to increase in value over time,
there's reluctance to spend it.
Cause you're like, oh, if I,
I'll just hold it and not spend it
because it's scarcity is increasing with time.
So if I spend it now, then I will regret spending it.
So I will just, you know, total it.
But if there's some dilution of the currency
occurring over time, that's more of an incentive
to use it as a currency.
So those coins somewhat randomly has a,
just a fixed number of sort of coins
or hash strings that are generated every year.
So there's some inflation, but it's not a percentage base.
It's a fixed number.
So the percentage of inflation
will necessarily decline over time.
So it just, I'm not saying
that it's like the ideal system for a currency,
but I think it actually is just fundamentally better
than anything else I've seen, just by accident.
So.
Like I said, around 2008.
So you're not, you know, some people suggested
you might be set to Oshinakamoto.
You've previously said you're not, let me ask.
You're not for sure.
Would you tell us if you were?
Yes.
Okay.
Do you think it's a feature or bug
that he's anonymous or she or they?
It's an interesting kind of quirk of human history
that there is a particular technology
that is a completely anonymous inventor.
Or creator.
Well, I mean, you can look at the evolution of ideas
before the launch of Bitcoin
and see who wrote, you know, about those ideas.
And then I don't know exactly,
obviously I don't know who created Bitcoin
for practical purposes,
but the evolution of ideas is pretty clear for that.
And like it seems as though like Nick Szabo
is probably more than anyone else
responsible for the evolution of those ideas.
So he claims not to be Nakamoto,
but I'm not sure that's neither here nor there,
but he seems to be the one more responsible
for the ideas behind Bitcoin than anyone else.
So it's not perhaps like singular figures
aren't even as important as the figures involved
in the evolution of ideas that led to a thing.
So, you know, most perhaps it's sad to think about history,
but maybe most names will be forgotten anyway.
What is the name anyway?
It's a name attached to an idea.
What does it even mean really?
I think Shakespeare had a thing about roses and stuff,
whatever you said.
Roses by any other name.
It smells sweet.
I gotta yield on to quote Shakespeare.
I feel like I accomplished something today.
Shall I compare thee to a summer's day?
I'm gonna clip that out instead of doing it.
It's a lot more temperate and more fair.
Autopilot, Tesla autopilot.
Tesla autopilot has been through an incredible journey
over the past six years,
or perhaps even longer in the minds of,
in your mind, in the minds of many involved.
I think that's where we first like connected
really was the autopilot stuff, autonomy and.
The whole journey was incredible to me to watch.
I was,
because I knew, well, part of it was I was at MIT
and I knew the difficulty of computer vision.
And I knew the whole, I had a lot of colleagues
and friends about the DARPA challenge.
I knew how difficult it is.
And so there was a natural skepticism.
When I first drove a Tesla with the initial system
based on Mobileye, I thought there's no way.
So the first one I got in, I thought there's no way
this car could maintain, like staying in the lane
and create a comfortable experience.
So my intuition initially was that the lane keeping problem
is way too difficult to solve.
Oh, lane keeping, yeah, that's relatively easy.
Well, like, but not the, but solve in the way that we just,
we talked about previous is prototype versus a thing
that actually creates a pleasant experience
over hundreds of thousands of miles and millions.
Yeah, so.
I mean, we had to wrap a lot of code around the Mobileye thing.
It doesn't just work by itself.
I mean, that's part of the story
of how you approach things sometimes.
Sometimes you do things from scratch.
Sometimes at first you kind of see what's out there
and then you decide to do from scratch.
That was one of the boldest decisions I've seen
is both on the hardware and the software
to decide to eventually go from scratch.
I thought, again, I was skeptical
of whether that's going to be able to work out
because it's such a difficult problem.
And so it was an incredible journey.
What I see now with everything,
the hardware, the compute, the sensors,
the things I maybe care and love about most
is the stuff that Andre Carpathi is leading
with the data set selection,
the whole data engine process,
the neural network architectures,
the way that's in the real world,
that network is tested, validated,
all the different test sets,
versus the ImageNet model of computer vision
like what's in academia is like real world
artificial intelligence.
So, and Andre is awesome
and obviously plays an important role,
but we have a lot of really talented people driving things.
So, and Ashok is actually the head
of autopilot engineering.
Andre is the director of AI.
AI stuff, yeah, yeah.
So yeah, there's, I'm aware that there's an incredible team
of just a lot going on.
Yeah, I just, you know, people will give me too much credit
and they'll give Andre too much credit, so.
And people should realize how much is going on
under the hood.
Yeah, it's just a lot of really talented people.
The Tesla autopilot AI team is extremely talented.
It's like some of the smartest people in the world.
So yeah, we're getting it done.
What are some insights you've gained
over those five, six years of autopilot
about the problem of autonomous driving?
So, you leaped in having some sort of first principles,
kinds of intuitions, but nobody knows
how difficult the problem, like the problem.
I thought the self driving problem would be hard,
but it was harder than I thought.
It's not like I thought it'd be easy.
I thought it'd be very hard,
but it was actually way harder than even that.
So, what it comes down to at the end of the day
is to solve self driving, you have to solve,
you basically need to recreate what humans do to drive,
which is humans drive with optical sensors,
eyes, and biological neural nets.
And so in order to, that's how the entire road system
is designed to work with basically passive optical
and neural nets, biologically.
And now that we need to,
so for actually for full self driving to work,
we have to recreate that in digital form.
So we have to, that means cameras
with advanced neural nets in silicon form,
and then it will obviously solve for full self driving.
That's the only way.
I don't think there's any other way.
But the question is, what aspects of human nature
do you have to encode into the machine, right?
Do you have to solve the perception problem, like detect?
And then you first, while it realize,
what is the perception problem for driving?
Like all the kinds of things you have to be able to see.
Like what do we even look at when we drive?
There's, I just recently heard Andre talked about at MIT
about like car doors.
I think it was the world's greatest talk
of all time about car doors.
The fine details of car doors.
Like what is even an open car door, man?
So like the the ontology of that,
that's the perception problem.
We humans solve that perception problem
and Tesla has to solve that problem.
And then there's the control and the planning
coupled with the perception.
You have to figure out like what's involved in driving,
like especially in all the different edge cases.
And then, I mean, maybe you can comment on this,
how much game theoretic kind of stuff needs to be involved,
you know, at a four way stop sign.
You know, as humans, when we drive,
our actions affect the world.
Like it changes how others behave.
Most of the time was driving,
if you're usually just responding to the scene,
as opposed to like really asserting yourself in the scene.
Do you think?
I think these sort of control logic conundrums
are not the hard part.
The, you know, let's see.
What do you think is the hard part
in this whole beautiful, complex problem?
So it's a lot of frigging software, man.
A lot of smart lines of code.
For sure, in order to have create an accurate vector space.
So like you're coming from image space,
which is like this flow of photons.
You're going to the camera cameras
and then you have this massive bit stream in image space.
And then you have to effectively compress
a massive bit stream corresponding to photons
that knocked off an electron in a camera sensor
and turn that bit stream into vector space.
By vector space, I mean like,
you know, you've got cars and humans
and lane lines and curves and traffic lights
and that kind of thing.
Once you have an accurate vector space,
the control problem is similar to that of a video game,
like a grand theft order of cyberpunk.
If you have accurate, accurate, best vector space.
It's the control problem is,
I wouldn't say it's trivial, it's not trivial, but it's,
it's not like some insurmountable thing.
But having an accurate vector space is very difficult.
Yeah, I think we humans don't give enough respect
to how incredibly human perception system is,
to mapping the raw photons
to the vector space representation in our heads.
Your brain is doing an incredible amount of processing
and giving you an image that is a very cleaned up image.
Like when we look around here, we see,
like you see color in the corners of your eyes,
but actually your eyes have very few cones,
like cone receptors in the peripheral vision.
Your eyes are painting color in the peripheral vision.
You don't realize it, but their eyes
are actually painting color.
And your eyes also have like this blood vessels
and also to gnarly things.
And there's a blind spot, but do you see your blind spot?
No, your brain is painting in the missing, the blind spot.
You can do these like, see these things online
where you look here and look at this point
and then look at this point.
And it's, if it's in your blind spot,
your brain will just fill in the missing bits.
It's so cool. The peripheral vision is so cool.
It makes you realize all the illusions for vision science
and so it makes you realize just how incredible the brain is.
The brain is doing crazy amount of post processing
on the vision signals from your eyes.
It's insane.
So, and then even once you get all those vision signals,
your brain is constantly trying to forget as much as possible.
So, human memory is perhaps the weakest thing
about the brain is memory.
So, because memory is so expensive to a brain
and so limited, your brain is trying to forget
as much as possible and distill the things that you see
into the smallest amounts of information possible.
So, your brain is trying to not just get to a vector space,
but get to a vector space
that is the smallest possible vector space
of only relevant objects.
And I think like, you can sort of look inside your brain,
or at least I can, like when you drive down the road
and try to think about what your brain is actually doing
consciously.
And it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's like, you'll see a car
that's, because you're, you're, you don't have cameras.
You, I don't have eyes in the back of your head or the side.
You know, so you say like, you basically, your, your head is
like a, you know, you basically have like two cameras
on a slow gimbal.
And, and what's your, and I said, it's not that great.
Okay.
You and I is, you know, like, and people are constantly
distracted and thinking about things and texting
and doing all sorts of things they shouldn't do in a car,
changing the radio station.
So, having arguments, you know, is like, so, so then,
like, say like, like, like when's the last time you looked
right and left and, you know, or, and, and rearward or even
diagonally, you know, forward to actually refresh your vector
space.
So you're glancing around and what your mind is doing is, is,
is trying to still the relevant vectors, basically objects
with a position and motion and, and, and then, and then, and
then editing that down to the least amount that's necessary
for you to drive.
It does seem to be able to edit it down or compress it even
further into things like concepts.
So it's not, it's like, it goes beyond the human mind seems
to go sometimes beyond vector space to sort of space of
concepts to where you'll see a thing.
It's no longer represented spatially somehow.
It's almost like a concept that you should be aware of.
Like if this is a school zone, you'll remember that.
Yeah.
As a concept, which is a weird thing to represent, but
perhaps for driving, you don't need to fully represent
those things, or maybe you get those kind of, um,
well, you, you, you, you, you need to like establish vector
space and then actually have predictions for, uh, that those
vector spaces.
So like, um, you know, like if, uh, you know, like you drive
fast, say, say, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, a bus and the, and you
see that this, this people, before you drove past the bus,
you saw people crossing like, or some just imagine there's
like a large truck or something blocking site.
Um, but you, before you came out to the truck, you saw
that there were some kids about to cross the road in front
of the truck.
Now you can no longer see the kids, but you, you, you need
to be able, but you would now know, okay, those kids are
probably going to pass by the truck and cross the road, even
though you cannot see them.
So you have to have, um, memory, uh, you have to need to
remember that there were kids there and you need to have
some forward prediction of what their position will be.
It's a really hard problem at the time of relevance.
So with, with occlusions and computer vision, when you can't
see an object anymore, even when it just walks behind a tree
and reappears, that's a really, really, I mean, at least in
academic literature, it's tracking through occlusions.
It's very difficult.
Yeah.
We're doing it.
Um, I understand this.
So some of it, it's like object permanence, like the same
thing happens with humans, with neural nets, like when, like
a toddler grows up, like there's a, there's a point in time
where, uh, they develop, they have a sense of object
permanence.
So before a certain age, if you have a ball, uh, or a toy
or whatever, and you put it behind your back and you pop it
out, if they don't, before they have object permanence, it's
like a new thing every time.
It's like, whoa, this toy went, poof, just spared.
And now it's back again.
And they can't believe it.
And that they can play peekaboo all day long because the
peekaboo is fresh every time.
But then we figured out object permanence.
Then they realized, oh, no, the object is not gone.
It's just behind your back.
Um, sometimes I wish we never did figure out object permanence.
Yeah.
So that's, uh, that's an important problem to solve.
Yes.
So, so, and like an important evolution of the neural nets in
the car is, uh, um, memory across, memory across both time and
space.
Um, so, uh, no, you can't remember, like you have to say,
like how long do you want to remember things for?
And, and it's, it doesn't, there's a cost to remembering
things for a long time.
So you get, you know, like run out of memory to try to remember
too much for too long.
Um, and, and then you also have things that are stale.
If, if, if they're, if you remember them for too long, and
then you also need things that are remembered, uh, remembered
over time.
So even if you like, say, have like, for a good sake, five
seconds of memory, uh, on a time basis, but like, let's say
you, you, you're parked at a light and you, and you saw, you
use a pedestrian example that people were waiting to cross
the, across the road and you can't, you can't quite see them
because of an occlusion.
Uh, but they might wait for a minute before the light
changes for them to cross the road.
You still need to, to remember that they, that that's where
they were, um, and that they're probably going to cross the
road type of thing.
Um, so even if that exceeds your, your, your time based
memory should not exceed your space of memory.
And I just think the data engine side of that.
So getting the data to learn all of the concepts that you're
saying now is an incredible process.
It's this iterative process of just, it's this, this
hydranet of many, hydranets, we're changing the name to
something else.
Okay.
I'm sure it'd be equally as Rick and Morty like, yeah, we've
rearchitected the neural net, uh, neural nets in the cars.
So many times it's crazy.
Oh, so every time there's a new major version, you'll rename it
to something more ridiculous or, or memorable and beautiful.
Sorry, not ridiculous, of course.
If you, if you see the full, the full like, uh, array of neural
nets that, that, that are operating in the car, it's kind
of boggles the mind.
There's so, there's so many layers.
It's crazy.
Um, so yeah.
Um, but, and, and we, we started off with, uh, simple neural
nets that were, uh, basically image recognition on a single
frame, from a single camera, uh, and then, uh, trying to knit
those together with it, you know, it with a C, uh, I should
say we, we're really primarily running C here because C plus
plus is too much overhead and we have our own C compiler.
So to get maximum performance, we actually wrote our own C
compiler and are continuing to optimize our C compiler, uh, for
maximum efficiency.
In fact, we've just recently, uh, done a new river on a, on a
C compiler that will compile directly to our autopilot
hardware.
Um,
Do you want to compile the whole thing down and with your
own compiler?
Yeah.
Like so efficiency here, cause there's all kinds of compute.
There's CPU, GPU, there's like the ASIC type of thing that's,
and you have to somehow figure out the scheduling across all
of those things.
And so you're compiling the code down.
Yeah.
It does all the, okay.
This is, so that's why there's a lot of people involved.
There's, there's a lot of hardcore, uh, software engineering at a
very sort of bare metal level, uh, cause you, we're trying to do
a lot of compute, uh, that's constrained to the, you know, our
full self driving computer.
So, and we want to try to have the highest frames per second, um,
possible, um, with, with sort of very, very finite amount of
compute, um, and power.
So, um, we really put a lot of effort into the efficiency
of our compute.
Um, and, and, uh, so there's actually a lot of work done by some
very talented software engineers at Tesla that, uh, at a very
foundational level to improve the efficiency of compute and how
we use the, the, the trip accelerators, uh, which are basically,
um, dot, you know, uh, doing matrix math dot, dot products, uh,
like a bazillion dot products.
And it's like, what, what, what, what are neural nets?
It's like computer wise, like 99% dot products.
So, you know, um,
And you want to achieve as many high frame rates like a video game.
You want full resolution, high frame rate, high frame rate, low latency,
um, low jitter, uh, so, um, I think one of the things for, um, moving
towards now is no post processing of the image through the, um, uh, the
image signal processor.
So, um, like for, for what happens for cameras is that almost all
cameras is they, um, there's a lot of post processing done in order
to make pictures look pretty.
Uh, and so we don't care about pictures looking pretty.
Um, we, we just want the data.
We, we, so we're, we're moving to just roll, roll photon counts.
So the system will, like the image that, that, that the computer sees is
actually much more than what you'd see if you're represented on a camera.
It's got much more data.
Uh, and even in very low light conditions, you can see that there's
a small photon count difference between, you know, the spot here and
that's about there, which means that, so it can see in the dark incredibly
well, um, because it can detect these tiny differences in photon counts.
Much better than you'd possibly imagine.
Um, so, and then we also save, uh, 13 milliseconds on a latency.
Uh, so, uh, from removing the post processing and the image.
Yes.
Yeah.
It's like, um, because we've got eight cameras and, and then there's, uh,
roughly, I don't know, one and a half milliseconds or so, maybe 1.6 milliseconds
of latency, um, for each camera.
And so it, like, um, going to just, uh, it basically bypassing the image processor.
Uh, gets us back 13 milliseconds of latency, which is important, um, and we
track latency all the way from, you know, photon hits the, the camera to, you
know, all the steps that it's got to go through to get, you know, go through the,
um, the various neural nets and the, the C code and, uh, and there's a
little bit of C plus plus there as well.
Um, well, I can maybe a lot, but it, the core stuff is the heavy duty computers
all in C, um, and, uh, and so, so we track that latency all the way to an
output command to the, um, drive unit to accelerate, uh, the brakes just to slow
down, steering your turn left or right.
Um, so, cause you got to output a command that's going to go to a controller
and like some of these controllers have an update frequency that's maybe, uh, 10
hertz or something like that, which is slow.
That's like, now you lose a hundred milliseconds potentially.
So, um, so then we want to update the, the drivers on the, like, say, steering and
braking control to have, um, more like, uh, 100 hertz instead of 10 hertz and you
got a 10 millisecond latency instead of a hundred milliseconds worst case latency.
And actually jitter is more of a challenge than, than, than latency.
Because latency is like, you can, you can, you can anticipate and predict, but if
you're, but if you've got a stack up of things going from the camera to the, to
the computer through, then you can, you can, you can, you can anticipate and
the computer through then a series of other computers.
And finally to an actuator on the car.
If you have a stack up of, uh, of tolerances of timing tolerances, then you
can have quite a variable latency, which is called jitter.
And, and that makes it a hard to, to, to anticipate exactly what, how you should
turn the car or accelerate.
Because, you know, if you've got maybe 150 to 200 milliseconds of jitter, then
you could be off by, you know, up to.2 seconds.
And this could make, this could make a big difference.
So you have to interpolate somehow to, to, to, to, uh, deal with the effects of jitter.
So you, you, you can make like robust control decisions.
Yeah.
Again, you have to, uh, so the jitter is in the sensor information or is it, the jitter
can occur at any stage in the pipeline.
You can, if you have just, if you have a fixed latency, you can anticipate, um, and,
and, and, uh, like say, okay, we know that, uh, our information is, for argument's sake,
150 milliseconds stale.
Like, so for, for, um, 140, for argument's sake, 150 milliseconds from photon second
camera to, um, where you can measure a change in the acceleration of the vehicle.
So then, uh, then you're going to say, okay, well, we're going to enter, we know it's
150 milliseconds, so we're going to take that into account and, uh, and compensate for that
latency.
However, if you, if you've got then 150 milliseconds of latency plus 100 milliseconds of jitter,
that's, which could be anywhere from zero to 100 milliseconds on top.
So, so then your latency could be from 150 to 250 milliseconds.
Now you've got 100 milliseconds that you don't know what to do with and, and that's basically random.
So getting rid of jitter is extremely important.
And that affects your control decisions and all those kinds of things.
Okay. Yeah, the, the cars is going to fundamentally maneuver better with lower jitter.
Got it.
And the, the, the, the cars will maneuver with superhuman ability and reaction time
much faster than a human.
I mean, I think over time the autopilot, full cell driving will be capable of maneuvers that,
um, you know, uh,
you know, are far more than what like James Bond could do in like the best movie type of thing.
That's exactly where I was imagining my mind as you said it.
It's like impossible maneuvers that a human couldn't do.
Well, let me ask sort of, uh, looking back the six years, looking out into the future,
based on your current understanding, how, how hard do you think this,
this full self driving problem, when do you think Tesla will solve level four FSD?
I mean, it's looking quite likely that it will be next year.
And what does the solution look like? Is it the current pool of FSD beta candidates?
They start getting greater and greater as they have been degrees of autonomy.
And then there's a certain level beyond which they can, they can do their own, they can read a book.
Yeah. So, uh, I mean, you can see that anybody who's been following the
full self driving beta closely will see that the, um, the rate of disengagement has been
dropping rapidly. So like disengagement be where, where the driver intervenes to prevent the car
from doing something dangerous potentially. So, um, so the interventions, you know, per million
miles has been dropping dramatically at some point the, and that trend looks like it happens next
year is the, the, the, the probability of an accident on FSD is less than that of the average
human and then, and then significantly less than that of the average human. Um, so it certainly
appears like we will get there next year. Um, then, then of course that, that, then there's
going to be a case of, okay, well, we now have to prove this to regulators and prove it to,
you know, and, and we, we, we want a standard that is not just equivalent to a human, but
uh, much better than the average human. I think it's got to be at least two or three times, uh,
higher safety than a human. So two or three times lower probability of injury than a human.
Um, before, before we would actually say like, okay, it's okay to go. It's not going to be a
cool, it's going to be much better. So if you look at 10 point FSD, 10.6 just came out recently,
10.7 is on the way, maybe 11 is on the way to where in the future. Yeah. Um, we were hoping
to get 11 out this year, but it's, uh, 11 actually has a whole bunch of, uh, fundamental
rewrites on the neural, neural net architecture, um, and, and some fundamental improvements, uh, in
creating vector space. Uh, so, uh, there is a, some fundamental like leap that really deserves
the 11. I mean, that's a pretty cool number. Yeah. Yeah. Uh, 11 would be a single stack for
all, you know, one stack to rule them all. Um, and, uh, but, but there, there's just some really
fundamental, uh, neural net architecture changes that are, that will allow for, uh, much more
capability, but, but, you know, at first they're going to have issues. So like we have this working
on like sort of alpha software and it's good, but it's, uh, it's, it's, it's, it's basically taking
a whole bunch of C C plus plus code and, and, and leading a massive amount of C plus plus code
and replacing it with the neural net. And you know, Andre, um, makes this point a lot, which
he's like neural nets, that kind of eating software, you know, over time there's like
less and less conventional software, more and more neural net, uh, which is still software, but it's,
you know, still comes out the lines of software, but, uh, it's more, more neural net stuff, uh, and
less, uh, you know, heuristics basically, um, if you're more, more, more, uh, matrix based
stuff, unless, uh, heuristics based stuff. Um, and, um, you know, like, like, like one of the big changes
will be, um, like right now the neural nets, uh, will, um, deliver a giant bag of points
to the C plus plus or C and C plus plus code. Yeah. Um, we call it the giant bag of points.
Yeah. Uh, and it's like, so you go to pixel and, and, and, and something associated with that pixel,
like this pixel is probably car, the pixel is probably lane line. Um, then you've got to
assemble this giant bag of points in the C code and turn it into, uh, vectors. Um, and, uh,
it does a pretty good job of it, but it's, it's, uh, it's, we want to just, we need another layer
of neural nets on top of that to take the, the giant bag of points and distill that down to
vector space in the, in the neural net part of the software as opposed to the heuristics
part of the software. This is a big improvement. Um, neural nets all the way down. That's what
you want. It's not even all neural nets, but it's, it's, it's, uh, this will be just a, this
is a game changer to not have the bag of points, the giant bag of points that has to be assembled
with, um, many lines of C C plus plus, uh, and, and have the, and have a neural net just
assemble those into vectors. So, so the, the neural net is outputting, um, much, much less
data. It's, it's, it's outputting this, this is a lane line. This is a curb. This is drivable
space. This is a car. This is, uh, you know, a pedestrian or cyclist or something like that.
It's outputting, um, it's really outputting, um, proper vectors to the, the C C plus plus control
control code as opposed to the sort of constructing the, the vectors, uh, in, in C. Um, we're done,
I think, quite a good job of, but it's, it's a, it's kind of hitting a local maximum on the,
how well the C can do this. Um, so this is, this is really, this is really a big deal. And, and
just all of the networks in the car need, need to move to surround video. There's still some
legacy networks that are not, uh, surround video. Um, and all of the training needs to move to
surround video and the efficiency of the training, uh, it needs to get better than it is. Uh, and
then we need to move everything to, uh, raw, uh, photon, uh, counts as opposed to, um, processed
images. Okay. It's just, it's just quite a big reset on the training because the system's trained
on post processed image images. So we need to redo all the training, uh, to train against
the, the raw photon counts instead of the post processed image. So ultimately it's kind of
reducing the complexity of the whole thing. So, uh, reducing, reducing the lines of code will
actually go, go lower. Yeah. That's fascinating. Um, so you're doing fusion of all the sensors
and reducing the complexity of having to deal with these cameras. There's a lot of cameras
really. Right. Yes. Um, same with humans. Uh, well, I guess we got years too. Okay. Yeah.
Well, we'll actually need to incorporate, um, sound as well. Um, cause you know, you need to like
listen for ambulance sirens or fire, you know, fire trucks, you know, uh, if somebody like
you know, yelling at you or something, I don't know, just that there's, there's a little bit of
audio that needs to be incorporated as well. Do you need to go back to break? Yeah, let's
just, let's take a break. Okay. Honestly, frankly, like the ideas are, are the easy thing and the
implementation is the hard thing. Like the idea of going to the moon is, is the easy part,
but going to the moon is the hard part. It's the hard part. Um, and there's a lot of like hardcore
engineering that's got to get done at the hardware and software level. Uh, likes optimizing the
C compiler and, uh, just, you know, uh, cutting out latency everywhere. Like this is, if we don't
do this, the system will not work properly. Um, so the work of the engineers doing this,
they are like the unsung heroes to some, you know, but they are critical to the success of the
situation. I think he made it clear. I mean, at least to me, it's super exciting. Everything
that's going on outside of what Andre is doing. Yeah. Just the whole infrastructure, the software.
I mean, everything is going on with data engine, uh, whatever, whatever it's called,
the whole process is, is just work of art to me.
Yeah. I think the, the, the sure scale of it is, is boggles mind. Like the training,
the amount of work done with the, like we've written all this custom software for training
and labeling, um, and to do auto labeling, auto labeling is essential. Um, because especially
when you've got like surround video, it's very difficult to like label surround video from scratch
is extremely difficult. Um, like take a human's such a long time to even label one video clip
like several hours, uh, or the order label it, uh, basically we're just apply a heavy, like heavy duty,
uh, like a lot of compute to the, to the video clips, um, to pre assign and guess what all the
things are that are going on in this round video. And then there's like correcting it.
Yeah. And then all the human has to do is like tweet, like say the, you know, change, adjust
what is incorrect. This, this is like increase, increase this productivity by effect a hundred
or more. Yeah. Uh, so you've presented Tesla bot as primarily useful in the factory. First of all,
I think human robots are incredible from a fan of robotics. I think, uh, the elegance of movement
that human, um, the human robots that by Peter robots show are just so cool. So it's, uh, really
interesting that you're working on this and also talking about applying the same kind of all the
ideas of some of which you've talked about with data engine, all the things that we're talking
about with Tesla autopilot, just, uh, transferring that over to the, just yet another robotics problem.
I have to ask, since I care about human robot interaction, so the human side of that,
so you've talked about mostly in the factory. Do you see it, uh, also, do you see part of this
problem that Tesla bot has to solve as interacting with humans and potentially having a place,
like in the home. So interacting, not just not replacing labor, but also like, I don't know,
being a friend or an assistant. Yeah. Yeah. I think the, the possibilities are, you know, endless.
Yeah. I mean, it's, it's, it's obviously like a, it's not quite in Tesla's primary mission
direction of accelerating sustainable energy, but, uh, it is a, an extremely useful thing
that we can do for the world, which is to make a useful humanoid robot. Um, that is capable of
interacting with the world and, um, helping in, in many different ways. Uh, so,
certainly in factories and really just, just, I mean, I think if you say like, uh, extrapolate
to, you know, many years in the future, it's like, I think, uh, work will become optional.
Yeah. So like there's a lot of jobs that if you, if you, if people weren't paid to do it,
they, they wouldn't do it. Like it's not, it's not fun, you know, necessarily. Like
if you're washing dishes all day, it's like, uh, you know, even if you really like washing dishes,
you really want to do it for eight hours a day every day. Probably not. So, um, and then there's
like dangerous work and basically if it's dangerous, boring, uh, it has like potential
for repetitive stress injury, injury, that kind of thing. Um, then that's really where
humanoid robots would add the most value initially. Um, so that's what we're aiming for is, is to, um,
for, for the humanoid robots to do jobs that people don't, don't voluntarily want to do.
Um, and then we'll have to pair that obviously with some kind of universal basic income in the
future. Uh, so I think, um, do you see a world when there's like hundreds of millions of Tesla
bots doing different performing different tasks throughout the world?
Yeah. I haven't really thought about it that far into the future, but I guess that there may be
something like that. Um, so I guess it's a wild question. So the, the number of Tesla cars has
been accelerating. It's been close to 2 million produced. Many of them have autopilot. I think
we're over 2 million now. Yeah. Do you think there will ever be a time when there'll be more Tesla
bots than Tesla cars? Yeah. I, I, I, you know, actually it's funny you ask this question because
normally I do try to think I'm pretty far into the future, but I haven't really thought that far
into the future with the, with the Tesla bot or it's code named Optimus. I call it Optimus subprime
because it's not, it's not like a giant, you know, transformer robot. Um, so, uh,
but it's meant to be a general purpose helpful, helpful bot. Um,
um, and, and basically like the things that we're basically like, like Tesla, I think, um,
is the, has the most advanced real world AI, uh, for interacting with the real world,
which you developed as a function of to, to make self driving work. Um, and so along with custom
hardware and like a lot of, you know, uh, hardcore low level software to have it run efficiently and
be, you know, power efficient because, you know, it's one thing to do neural nets. If you've got a
gigantic solar room with 10,000 computers, but now let's say you just, you have to now distill
that down into one computer that's running at low power in a humanoid robot or a car. Um,
that's actually very difficult and a lot of hardcore software is required for that. Um,
so, so since we're kind of like solving the navigate the real world with neural nets problem
for cars, which are kind of robots with four wheels, then it's like kind of a natural extension
of that is to put it in a robot with arms and legs, uh, and actually, you know, actuators. Um, so,
um, like, like the, the, the two, like hard things are like, you basically need to make the,
have the robot be intelligent enough to interact in a sensible way with the environment. Um,
so you should need real, real world AI and you need to be very good at, um, manufacturing,
which is a very hard problem. Tesla is very good at manufacturing and also has the real world AI.
So making the humanoid robot work is, uh, basically means developing custom, uh, motors and sensors,
uh, that, that are different for what a car would use. Um, but we, we're also, we have a, um,
I think we have the, the, the best expertise in developing advanced electric motors and
power electronics. So it just has to be for a humanoid robot application on a car.
Still, you do talk about love sometimes. So let me ask, this isn't like for like sex robots
or something like that. Love is the answer. Yes. Uh, there is something compelling to us,
not compelling, but we connect with, um, humanoid robots or even legged robots,
like with the dog and shapes of dogs. It just, it seems like, you know, there's a huge amount
of loneliness in this world. All of us seek companionship and with other humans, friendship
and all those kinds of things. We have a lot of here in Austin, a lot of people have dogs.
That's right. Um, there seems to be a huge opportunity to also have robots that decrease
the, uh, the, the amount of loneliness in the world or help us humans connect with each,
with each other. So in the way that dogs can, um, do you think about that?
We'll test about it all. Or is it really focused on the problem of, of performing specific tasks,
not connecting with humans? Um, I mean, to be, to be honest, I have not actually thought about it
from the companionship standpoint, but I think it actually would end up being, it could be actually
a very good companion. Um, and it could, you develop like a personality, uh, over time that is,
that is like unique. Like, uh, you know, it's not like they're just all the robots are the same.
And that personality could evolve to be, you know, uh, match, match the, the, the owner or the,
you know, yes, the owner, uh, well, uh, whatever you want to call it, uh, the other companion,
the other half, right? Uh, in the same way that friends do. See, I think that's a huge opportunity.
I think, yeah, no, that's interesting. Like, um, the, because, you know, like there's, uh,
Japanese phrase, I like the, uh, Wabi Savi, you know, uh, the subtle imperfections
are what makes something special. And the subtle imperfections of the personality of the robot
mapped to the subtle imperfections of the robot's human friend, I don't know,
owner sounds like maybe the wrong word, but, um, could actually make an incredible buddy,
basically. And in that way, the imperfections, like R2D2 or like a C3PO sort of thing, you know.
So from a machine learning perspective, I think the flaws being a feature is really nice.
You could be quite terrible at being a robot for quite a while in the general home environment
or all in the general world. And that's kind of adorable. And that's like, those are your flaws
and you fall in love with those flaws. So it's, it's a, it's very different than autonomous
driving where it's a very high stakes environment. You cannot mess up. And so it's, yeah, it's more
fun to be a robot in the home. Yeah. In fact, if you think of like a C3PO and R2D2, like they
actually had a lot of like flaws and imperfections and silly things and they would argue with each
other. And, um, were they actually good at doing anything? I'm not exactly sure.
I definitely added a lot to the story. Um, but, but, but there's, there's sort of quirky elements
and, you know, that they would like make mistakes and do things. Like it was like, uh, it made them
relatable, I don't know, um, enduring. So, so yeah, I think that that could be something
that probably would happen. Um, but our initial focus is just to make it useful. Uh, so, so,
um, I'm confident we'll get it done. I'm not sure what the exact timeframe is, but uh,
like we'll probably have, I don't know, a decent prototype towards the end of next year or something
like that. And it's cool that it's connected to Tesla, the car. So, so yeah, it's, it's, it's using
a lot of, you know, it would use the autopilot inference computer and, um, a lot of the training
that we've done for the four cars in terms of recognizing real world things could be applied
directly to the, to the robot. Um, so it, but, but there's, there's a lot of custom actuators
and sensors that need to be developed. And an extra module on top of the vector space,
uh, for love. Uh, yeah. That's amazing. Okay. We can add that to the car too.
That's true. Um, that could be useful in all environments. Like you said, a lot of people
argue in the car. So maybe we can help them out. Uh, you're a student of history,
fan of Dan Carlin's hardcore history podcast. Yeah, that's great. Greatest podcast ever.
Yeah. I think it is actually, it almost doesn't really count as a podcast. Yeah. It's more like
a audio book. Yeah. So you were on the podcast with Dan, I just had a chat with him about it.
He said, you guys want military and all that kind of stuff. Uh, yeah, it's literally, uh, it was
basically, um, uh, I think it should be titled engineer wars. Uh, essentially like, like when
there's a rapid change in the rate of technology, then, uh, engineering plays a pivotal role in,
in victory and battle. Um, do you get, how far back in history did you go? Did you go World War
II? Uh, it was mostly, well, it was supposed to be a deep dive on fighters and bomber, uh,
technology in World War II. Um, but that ended up being more wide ranging than that. Um,
because I just went down the, a total rathole of like studying all of the fighters and bombers
of World War II and like the constant rock, paper, scissors game that like, you know, uh,
one country would make this plane, then it'd make a plane to beat that and that's what I'm
trying to make a plane to beat that. And then the, and really what matters is like the pace of
innovation, um, and also access to high quality, uh, fuel and, uh, raw materials. So like Germany
had like some amazing designs, but they couldn't make them, uh, because they couldn't get their
raw materials. Uh, and, uh, they, they had a real problem with the oil and, and, and, uh, fuel
basically the fuel quality was extremely, uh, variable. So the design wasn't the bottleneck
because, uh, yeah, like the US had kick ass fuel, uh, that was like very consistent. Like the
problem is if you make a very high performance aircraft engine, um, in order to make high
performance, you have to, um, the, the, the, the, the fuel, the aviation gas, uh, has to be a consistent
mixture and, uh, uh, it has to have a high octane. Um, like high octane is the most important thing,
but also can't have like impurities and stuff, uh, because you'll, you'll foul up the engine
and, and, and Germany just never had good access to oil. Like they try to get it by invading the
Caucasus, um, but that didn't work too well. Never works well.
That's, that's for you. So there was, Germany was always struggling with, with basically shitty
oil. Um, and then they could not, uh, they, they couldn't count on a, on high quality fuel for
their aircraft. So then they had to have all these additives and stuff. Uh, so, um, uh, whereas the
US had awesome fuel, um, and that provided that to Britain as well. Um, so that allowed the British
and the Americans to design aircraft engines that were, uh, super high performance, better than
anything else in the world. Germany could, could, could design the engines. They just didn't have
the fuel. Uh, and then also the, like I said, the, the, uh, the quality of the aluminum allies that
they were getting was also not that great. And so, you know,
is your, is this like, uh, do you talk about all this with them?
Yeah. Awesome. Broadly looking at history, when you look at Genghis Khan, when you look at Stalin,
Hitler, the darkest moments of human history, uh, what do you take away from those moments?
Does it help you gain insight about human nature, about human behavior today,
whether it's the wars or the individuals or just the behavior of people, any aspects of history?
Yeah, I find history fascinating. Um,
um, there's just a lot of incredible things that have been done, good and bad, um, that they
help, you just help you understand the nature of civilization, um, and individuals and
Does it make you sad that humans do these kinds of things to each other? You look at the 20th
century, World War II, the cruelty, the abuse of power, talk about communism, Marxism and Stalin.
Um, I mean, some of these things do, I mean, if you, like there's a lot of human history,
um, most of it is actually people just getting on with their lives. Uh, you know, and it's not like
human history is just, uh, what nonstop war and disaster is, those are actually just
those are intermittent and rare. And if they weren't, then, you know, humans would soon cease to exist.
Uh, but it's just that wars tend to be written about a lot. And whereas, like, uh,
uh, something being like, well, a normal year where nothing major happened was doesn't get
written about much, but that's, you know, most people just like farming and kind of like living
their life, you know, um, being a villager somewhere. Um, and every now and again, there's a war
and a thing. So, um, and, um, you know, I'd say like that there aren't very many books that I,
where I just had to start reading because it was just too, too dark. But, uh, the book about Stalin,
the court of the red czar, I had to start reading. It was just too, too dark, rough.
Yeah. Um, the thirties, uh, there's a lot, a lot of lessons there to me in particular that it feels
like humans, like all of us have that as the old soldiers in line, um, that the line between good
and evil runs to the heart of every man that all of us are capable of evil. All of us are capable
of good. It's almost like this kind of responsibility that, um, all of us have to, to, to tend towards
the good. And so like to me, looking at history is almost like an example of, look, you have some
charismatic leader that, uh, convinces you of things is too easy based on that story to do evil
onto each other, onto your family and to others. And so it's like our responsibility to do good.
Um, it's not like now is somehow different from history. That can happen again. All of it can
happen again. And yes, most of the time you're right. I mean, the optimistic view here is mostly
people are just living life. And as you've often memed about, uh, the quality of life was way worse
back in the day and keeps improving over time through innovation to technology.
But still it's somehow notable that these blimps of atrocities happen. Sure. Yeah. I mean life was
really tough for most of history. Um, I mean, for most of human history, um, a good year would be
one where not that many people in your village died of the plague, starvation, freezing to death,
or being killed by a neighboring village. It's like, well, it wasn't that bad. You know, it was
only like, you know, we lost 5% this year. That was, uh, it was a good year. You know, that would
be part of the course. Like just, just not starving to death would have been like the primary goal
of most people in through throughout history is making sure we'll have no foods last for the
winter and not get, not freeze or whatever. So, um, now food is, is plentiful. I have an obesity
problem. Um, you know, so. Well, yeah. The lesson there is to be grateful for the way things are
now for, for some of us. We've spoken about this offline. I'd love to get your thought about it here.
If I sat down for a long form in person conversation with the president of Russia,
Vladimir Putin, would you potentially want to call in for a few minutes to join in on a conversation
with a moderated translated by me? Sure. Yeah. Sure. I'd be happy to do that.
You've shown interest in the Russian language. Is this grounded in your interest in history
of linguistics, culture, general curiosity? I think it sounds cool. Sounds cool. Now it looks cool.
Well, it's, it's, you know, it's, it's a, it's, it takes a moment to read Cyrillic.
Once you know what the Cyrillic characters stand for, actually, then reading Russian
becomes a lot easier because there are a lot of words that are actually the same.
Like bank is bank. So find the words that are exactly the same and now you start to understand
Cyrillic. Yeah. If you can, if you can sound it out, it's much, there's at least some commonality
of words. What about the culture? You, you love great engineering, physics. There's a tradition
of the sciences there. Sure. You look at the 20th century from rocketry. So, you know,
some of the greatest rockets of the space exploration has been done in the Soviet and the
former Soviet Union. Yeah. So do you draw inspiration from that history? Just how this
culture that in many ways, I mean, one of the sad things is because of the language,
which a lot of it is lost to history because it's not translated to all those kinds of,
because it, it is in some ways an isolated culture. It flourishes within its, within its borders.
Yeah. So do you draw inspiration from those folks from, from the history of science engineering
there? I mean, the Soviet Union, Russia, and Ukraine as well, and have a really strong history
in spaceflight. Like some of the most advanced and impressive things in history were done,
you know, by the Soviet Union. So one can, cannot help but admire the
impressive rocket technology that was developed. You know, after the sort of full Soviet Union,
the, there's, there's much less that, that, than happened. But
still things are happening, but it's not, not quite at the
frenetic pace that was happening before the Soviet Union kind of
dissolved into separate republics. Yeah. I mean, I, I, you know, there's Roscosmos,
the Russian agency. I look forward to a time when those countries with China are working together,
the United States are all working together. Maybe a little bit of friendly competition, but
like friendly competition is good. You know, government's so slow, and the only thing slower
than one government is a collection of governments. So the Olympics would be boring if everyone just
crossed the finishing line at the same time. Yeah. Nobody would watch. Yeah. And, and people wouldn't
try hard to run fast and stuff. So I think friendly competition is a good thing.
This is also a good place to give a shout out to a video titled the entire Soviet rocket engine
family tree by Tim Dodd, aka everyday astronaut. It's like an hour and a half. It gives a full
history of Soviet rockets. And people should definitely go check on support Tim in general.
That guy's super excited about the future, super excited about a spaceflight. Every time I see
anything by him, I just have a stupid smile on my face because he's so excited about stuff.
Yeah. Tim Dodd is really, really great. If you're interested in anything to do with space,
he's, in terms of explaining rocket technology to your average person, he's awesome. The best,
I'd say. And I should say like the part of the reason like I switched us from, like Raptor at
one point was going to be a hydrogen engine. But hydrogen has a lot of challenges. It's very low
density. It's a deep cryogen. So it's only liquid at a very, you know, very close to absolute zero
requires a lot of insulation. It's, so it is a lot of challenges there.
And I was actually reading a bit about Russian rocket engine developments. And
at least the impression I had was that Soviet Union Russia and Ukraine primarily were
actually in the process of switching to methalox. And there was some interesting
test and data for ISP, like they were able to get like up to like a 382nd ISP with the
methalox engine. And I was like, well, okay, that's, that's actually really impressive. So
so I think we could, you could actually get a much lower cost, like in optimizing cost per
time to orbit cost per time to Mars. It's, I think methane oxygen is the way to go.
And I was partly inspired by the Russian work on the test stands with methalox engines.
And now for something completely different. Do you mind doing a bit of a meme review in the
spirit of the great, the powerful beauty pie, let's say one to 11, just go over a few documents
printed out. We can try. Let's try this. I present to you document number Uno.
I don't know. Okay. Vlad the Impaler discovers marshmallows.
Yeah, that's not bad.
So you get it because he's failing things. I don't know, three, whatever.
That's not very good.
This is grounded in some engineering, some history.
Yeah, give us an eight out of 10.
What do you think about nuclear power?
I'm in favor of nuclear power. I think it's in a place that is not subject to extreme natural
disasters. I think it's a nuclear power is a great way to generate electricity.
I don't think we should be shutting down nuclear power stations.
Yeah, but what about Chernobyl?
Exactly. So I think people, there's like a lot of fear of radiation and stuff.
And it's, I guess, probably like a lot of people just don't
even study engineering or physics. It's just the word radiation just sounds scary.
You know, so they don't, they can't calibrate what radiation means. But radiation is much
less dangerous than you think. So like, for example, Fukushima, when the Fukushima problem
happened due to the tsunami, I got people in California asking me if they should worry about
radiation from Fukushima. And I'm like, definitely not, not even slightly, not at all. That is crazy.
And just to show, like, look, this is how, like, the danger is so much overplayed compared to what
it really is that I actually flew to Fukushima and I donated a solar power system for what
a treatment plant. And, and I made a point of eating locally grown vegetables on TV in Fukushima.
Like, I'm still alive. Okay.
So it's not even at the risk of these events as low, but the impact of them is.
Impact is greatly exaggerated. It's just human nature.
It's people who don't know what radiation is, like I've had people ask me, like, what about
radiation from cell phones, quoting, causing brain cancer? I'm like, when you say radiation,
do you mean photons or particles than like that? I don't know what, what do you mean
photons particles? So do you mean, let's say photons? What, what, what frequency,
wavelength? And they're like, no idea. Like, do you know that everything's radiating all the time?
Like, what do you mean? Like, yeah, everything's radiating all the time.
Photons are being emitted by, by all objects all the time, basically. So,
and if you want to know what it's, it's what, what it means to stand in front of nuclear fire,
go outside. The sun is a gigantic, you know, thermonuclear reactor that you're staring
right at it. Are you still alive? Yes. Okay. Amazing.
Yeah. I guess radiation is one of the words that could be used as a tool to, to, to fear
monger by certain people. That's it. And I think people just don't, don't understand. So, I mean,
that's the way to fight that, that fear, I suppose, is to understand, is to learn.
Yeah. Just say like, okay, how many people have actually died from nuclear accidents? It's like
practically nothing. And say how many people have, have died from, you know, coal plants? And
it's a very big number. So like, obviously, we should not be starting up coal plants and shutting
down nuclear plants. It just doesn't make any sense at all. Coal plants, like, I don't know,
a hundred to a thousand times worse for, for health than nuclear power plants.
You want to go to the next one? This is really bad.
So that 90, 180 and 360 degrees, everybody loves the math, nobody gives a shit about 270.
It's not super funny. I don't like 203. Yeah. This is not, you know, LOL situation.
Yeah.
Yeah. That's pretty good.
The United States oscillating between establishing and destroying dictatorships.
It's like a metro. Is that a metro? Yeah. What does that mean? Yeah.
Yeah. It's a 7 out of 10. It's kind of true. Oh, yeah. This is,
this is kind of personal for me. Next one. Oh, man. This is Leica?
Yeah. Well, no, this is... Or it's like referring to Leica or something?
As Leica is like a husband. Hello. Yes. This is dog. Your wife was launched to space.
And then the last one is him with his eyes closed and a bottle of vodka.
Yeah. Leica didn't come back. No. They don't tell you the full story of, you know,
what the love, the impact they had on the loved ones.
True. That one gets an 11 for me. Sure.
The Soviet set up. Yeah. This keeps going on the Russian theme. First man in space,
nobody cares. First man on the moon. Well, I think people do care.
No, I know. But...
Yuri Gagarin's names will be forever in history, I think.
There is something special about placing like stepping foot onto another totally foreign land.
It's not the journey like people that explore the oceans. It's not as important to explore the
oceans as to land on a whole new continent. Yeah.
Well, this is about you. Oh, yeah. I'd love to get your comment on this.
Elon Musk, after sending $6.6 billion to the UN to end world hunger, you have three hours.
Yeah. Well, I mean, obviously $6 billion is not going to end world hunger. So
so I mean, the reality is at this point, the world is producing
far more food than it can really consume it. Like we don't have a caloric
constraint to this point. So where there is hunger, it is almost always due to
like civil war, strife or some like... It's not a thing that is
extremely rare for it to be just a matter of lack of money. It's like,
you know, it's like some, the civil war in some country and like one part of the country is
literally trying to starve the other part of the country. So it's much more complex than
something that money could solve. It's geopolitics. It's a lot of things. It's human nature.
It's governments. It's money, monetary systems, all that kind of stuff.
Yeah. Food is extremely cheap these days. It's like,
I mean, the US at this point, you know, among low income families, obesity is actually another
problem. It's not, like obviously it's not hunger. It's like too many calories. So
it's not that nobody's hungry anywhere. It's just, this is not a simple matter of adding money and
solving it. What do you think that one gets? It's getting... Two.
Just going after Empire's world. Where did you get those artifacts? The British Museum
has a shout out to Monty Python. We found them.
Yeah. The British Museum is pretty great. I mean,
immediately Britain did take these historical artifacts from all around the world and put
them in London. But, you know, it's not like people can't go see them. So it is a convenient
place to see these ancient artifacts is London for, you know, for a large segment of the world.
So I think, you know, on balance, the British Museum is a net good. Although I'm sure
that a lot of countries argue about that. Yeah. It's like you want to make these historical
artifacts accessible to as many people as possible. And the British Museum, I think,
does a good job of that. Even if there's a darker aspect to, like, the history of Empire in general,
whatever the Empire is, however things were done, it is the history that happened. You
can't sort of erase that history, unfortunately. You could just become better in the future.
That's the point. Yeah. I mean, it's like, well, how are we going to pass from all judgment on
these things? Like, it's like, you know, if one is going to judge, say, the British Empire,
you got to judge, you know, what everyone was doing at the time, and how were the British
relative to everyone? And I think they were first would actually get like a relatively good grade,
relatively good grade, not an absolute terms, but compared to what everyone else was doing.
They were not the worst. Like I said, you got to look at these things in the context of the
history at the time, and say, what were the alternatives? And what are you comparing it
against? Yes. And I do not think it would be the case that Britain would get a bad grade
in when looking at history at the time. You know, if you judge history from, you know,
from what is morally acceptable today, you basically are going to give everyone a failing
grade. I'm not clear. I don't think anyone would get a passing grade in their morality of,
like you go back 300 years ago, like, who's getting a passing grade? Basically, no one.
And we might not get a passing grade from generations that come after us. What does that one get?
Sure. Six, seven, seven.
For the Monty Python, maybe. I always love Monty Python. They're great.
I like for Brian and the Quist of the Holy Grail are incredible.
Yeah, yeah. Yeah, those serious eyebrows. Brezhnev. How important do you think is facial hair to
great leadership? Well, you got a new haircut. How does that affect your leadership?
I don't know. Hopefully not. It doesn't.
Yeah, the second is no one.
There is no one competing with Brezhnev. No one, too.
Those are like epic eyebrows. So, sure. That's ridiculous.
Give it a six or seven. I don't know. I like this, like, Shakespeare analysis of memes.
Brezhnev, he had a flair for drama as well. Like, you know, showmanship.
Yeah, yeah. It must come from the eyebrows. All right. Invention, great engineering.
Look what I invented. That's the best thing since ripped up bread.
Yeah. Because they invented sliced bread. Am I just explaining memes at this point?
This is what my life has become.
You're going to be more of a meme explainer.
Yeah, I'm a meme. Like a scribe that like runs around with the kings and just like writes down
memes. I mean, when was the cheeseburger invented? That's like an epic invention.
Yeah. Like, wow.
You know, versus just like a burger?
Or burger. I guess a burger in general. It's like, you know.
Then there's like, what is a burger? What's the sandwich? And then you start getting
the pizza sandwich and what is the original? It gets into an ontology argument.
Yeah. But everybody knows like, if you order like a burger or cheeseburger or whatever and you
like, you got like, you know, tomato and some lettuce and onions and whatever and, you know,
you know, mayo and ketchup and mustard. It's like epic.
Yeah. But I'm sure they've had bread and meat separately for a long time and it was kind of
a burger on the same plate, but somebody who actually combined them into the same thing
and you buy it and hold it, makes it convenient. It's a materials problem. Like your hands don't
get dirty and whatever. Yeah, it's brilliant.
Well, that is not what I would have guessed.
But everybody knows like, if you order a cheeseburger, you know what you're getting,
you know, it's not like some obtuse. Like, I wonder what I'll get, you know.
You know, fries are, I mean, great. I mean, they're the devil, but fries are awesome. And
yeah, pizza is incredible. Food innovation doesn't get enough love.
Yeah. I guess is what we're getting at.
It's great. What about the Matthew McGonaghey Austinite here?
President Kennedy, do you know how to put men on the moon yet?
NASA know. President Kennedy, be a lot cooler if you did.
Pretty much. Sure. Six, six or seven.
And this is the last one. That's funny.
Someone drew a bunch of dicks all over the walls of Sistine Chapel Boys Bathroom.
Sure. I'll give it nine. It's really true.
This is our highest ranking meme for today.
I mean, it's true. Like, how do they get away with that?
Lots of nakedness. I mean, dick pics are, I mean, just something throughout history.
As long as people can draw things, there's been a dick pic.
It's a staple of human history.
It's a staple. Consistence throughout human history.
You tweeted that you aspire to comedy. Your friends with Joe Rogan
might you do a short stand up comedy set at some point in the future?
Maybe open for Joe, something like that. Is that really stand up?
Actual just full on stand up? Full on stand up. Is that in there or is that?
I've never thought about that.
It's extremely difficult if at least that's what Joe says in the comedians say.
Huh. I wonder if I could. The only one way to find out.
You know, I have done stand up for friends just impromptu.
You know, I'll get on like a roof and they do laugh, but they're our friends too.
So I don't know if you've got to call, you know, like a room of strangers.
Are they going to actually also find it funny? But I could try. See what happens.
I think you'd learn something either way. Yeah, I kind of love
both the, when you bomb and when, when you do great just watching people,
how they deal with it. It's so difficult. It's so, you're so fragile
up there. It's just you and you think you're going to be funny.
And when it completely falls flat, it's just, it's beautiful to see people
deal with like that. I might have enough material to do stand up.
I've never thought about it, but I might have enough material.
I don't know, like 15 minutes or something. Oh yeah. Yeah. Do a Netflix special.
Netflix special. Sure. What's your favorite Rick and Morty concept?
Just to spring that on you. Is there, there's a lot of sort of scientific engineering ideas
explored there. There's the favorite. There's the butter robot. It's great.
Yeah. It's a great show. You like it? Yeah. Rick and Morty is awesome.
Somebody that's exactly like you from an alternate dimension showed up there, Elon Tusk.
Yeah. That's right. That you voiced.
Yeah. Rick and Morty certainly explores a lot of interesting concepts.
Like what's the favorite one? I don't know. The butter robot certainly is,
you know, it's like, it's certainly possible to have too much sentence in a device.
Like you don't want to have your toast to be like a super genius toaster.
It's going to hate life because all it could just make is toast. But if, you know, it's like,
you don't want to have like super intelligence stuck in a very limited device.
Do you think it's too easy from a, if we're talking about from the engineering perspective
of super intelligence, like with Marvin, the robot, like is it just, it seems like it might
be very easy to engineer just a depressed robot. Like it, it's not obvious to engineer a robot
that's going to find a fulfilling existence. Same as humans, I suppose. But I wonder if that's like
the default. If you don't do a good job on building a robot, it's going to be sad a lot.
Well, we can reprogram robots easier than we can reprogram humans. So I guess if you let it evolve
without tinkering, then it might get sad. But you can change the optimization function and
have it be a cheery robot.
You, like I mentioned with, with SpaceX, you give a lot of people hope. And a lot of people look
up to you, millions of people look up to you. If we think about young people in high school,
maybe in college, what advice would you give to them about if they want to try to do something
big in this world, they want to really have a big positive impact, what advice would you give them
about their career, maybe about life in general?
Try to be useful. You do things that are useful to your fellow human beings to the world. It's
very hard to be useful. Very hard. You know, are you contributing more than you consume?
You know, like, like, can you try to have a positive net contribution to society?
I think that's the thing to aim for, you know, not to try to be sort of a leader for,
for the sake of being a leader or whatever. A lot of time people who, a lot of time, the people
you want as leaders are the people who don't want to be leaders. So if you can live a useful life,
that is a good life, a life worth having lived. You know, and like I said, I would encourage people
to use the mental tools of physics and apply them broadly in life. They are the best tools.
When you think about education and self education, what do you recommend? So there's the university,
there's self study, there is a hands on sort of finding a company or a place or a set of people
that do the thing you're passionate about and joining them as early as possible.
There's taking a road trip across Europe for a few years and writing some poetry,
which trajectory do you suggest in terms of learning about how you can become useful,
as you mentioned, how you can have the most positive impact?
Well, I encourage people to read a lot of books. Basically, try to ingest as much information as
you can and try to also just develop a good general knowledge. So you at least have a rough
lay of the land of the knowledge landscape. Try to learn a little bit about a lot of things.
Because you might not know what you're really interested in. How would you know what you're
really interested in if you at least aren't doing it peripheral exploration or broadly of
the knowledge landscape? And you talk to people from different walks of life and different
industries and professions and skills and occupations. Just try to learn as much as possible.
Man's search for meaning.
Isn't the whole thing a search for meaning?
Yeah, what's the meaning of life and all? But just generally, like I said, I would encourage
people to read broadly in many different subject areas and then try to find something where there's
an overlap of your talents and what you're interested in. So people may be good at something,
but they may have skill at a particular thing, but they don't like doing it.
So you want to try to find a thing where that's a good combination of the things that you're
inherently good at, but you also like doing. And reading is a super fast shortcut to
figure out where are you. You're both good at it. You like doing it, and it will actually have positive
impact. Well, you got to learn about things somehow. So reading a broad range, it's just
really read it. One important one is that kid I read through the encyclopedia. So that's pretty
helpful. And those are things I didn't even know existed. Well, lots, obviously. It's like as
broad as it gets. Encyclophilias were digestible, I think, whatever, 40 years ago. So maybe read
through the condensed version of the encyclopedia Britannica. I'd recommend that. You can always
like skip subjects or you read a few paragraphs, and no, you're not interested. Just jump to the
next one. So read the encyclopedia or scan through it. And you know, put a lot of stock and
certainly have a lot of respect for someone who puts in an honest day's work to do useful things.
And just generally to have like not a zero sum mindset, or like have more of a
like, grow the pie mindset, like the, if you sort of say like, when we see people like,
perhaps, including some very smart people, kind of taking an attitude of like, like,
like doing things that seem like morally questionable. It's often because they have
at a base sort of axiomatic level, a zero sum mindset. And, and they without realizing it,
they don't realize they have a zero sum mindset, or at least they don't realize it consciously.
And so if you have a zero sum mindset, then the only way to get ahead is by taking things from
others. If it's like, if the, if the, if the pie is fixed, then the only way to have more pie is to
take someone else's pie. But, but this is false, like obviously the pie has grown dramatically
over time, the economic pie. So the reality, in reality, you can have, so over useless analogy,
if you have a lot of, there's a lot of pie. Pie pie is not fixed. So you really want to make sure
you don't, you're not operating without realizing it from a zero sum mindset, where, where the only
way to get ahead is to take things from others, then that's going to result in you trying to
take things from others, which is not, not good. It's much better to work on adding to the economic
pie, maybe, you know, so creating, like I said, creating more than you consume, doing more than
you. Yeah. So that's a big deal. I think there's like, you know, a fair number of people in,
in finance that do have a bit of a zero sum mindset.
I mean, it's all walks of life. I've seen that. And one of the, one of the reasons
Rogan inspires me is he celebrates others a lot. This is not, not creating a constant competition.
Like there's a scarcity of resources. What happens when you celebrate others and you promote others,
the ideas of others, it, it, it actually grows that pie. I mean, it, every, like the,
the resource, the resources become less scarce. And that, that applies in a lot of kinds of
domains. It applies in academia where a lot of people are very, see some funding for academic
research is zero sum. And it is not, if you celebrate each other, if you make, if you get
everybody to be excited about AI, about physics, about mathematics, I think it, there'll be more,
more funding. And I think everybody wins. Yeah. That applies, I think broadly.
Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. So last, last, last question about love and meaning.
What is the role of love in the human condition broadly and more specific to you? How has love,
romantic love, or otherwise made you a better person, a better human being?
Better engineer?
Now you're asking really perplexing questions. It's hard to give up. I mean, there are many
books, poems, and songs written about what is love and what is, what exactly, you know,
you know, what is love? Maybe you don't hurt me.
That's one of the great ones. Yes. Yeah. You've, you've earlier quoted Shakespeare,
but that, that's really up there. Yeah. Love is a many splendid thing.
I mean, there's, because we've talked about so many inspiring things like be useful in the world,
sort of like solve problems, alleviate suffering, but it seems like connection between humans is a
source, you know, it's a source of joy is a source of meaning. And that, that's what love is, friendship,
love. I just wonder if you think about that kind of thing when you talk about preserving the light
of human consciousness or it's becoming a multi planetary multi planetary species.
I mean, to me, at least that, that means like, if we're just alone and conscious and intelligent,
it doesn't mean nearly as much as if we're with others, right? And there's some magic created
when we're together. The, the French of it, and I think the highest form of it is love,
which I think broadly is, is much bigger than just sort of romantic, but also yes,
romantic love and family and those kinds of things.
Well, I mean, the reason I guess I care about us becoming multi planetary species in a space
frank civilization is foundationally, I love humanity. And, and so I wish to see it prosper and
do great things and be happy. And if I did not love humanity, I would not care about these things.
So when you look at the whole of it, the human history, all the people who's ever lived, all
the people alive now, it's pretty, we're okay. On the whole, we're pretty interesting bunch.
Yeah. All things considered. And I've read a lot of history, including the darkest,
worst parts of it. And despite all that, I think on balance, I still love humanity.
You joked about it with the 42. What do you think is the meaning of this whole thing?
Is it like, is there a non numerical representation?
Yeah. Well, really, I think what Dr. Sattons was saying in Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy is that
the universe is the answer. And what we really need to figure out are what questions to ask
about the answer that is the universe. And that the question is the really the hard part. And
if you can properly frame the question, then the answer relatively speaking is easy.
So therefore, if you want to understand what questions to ask about the universe,
you want to understand the meaning of life. We need to expand the scope and scale of consciousness
so that we're better able to understand the nature of the universe and understand the
meaning of life. And ultimately, the most important part would be to ask the right question.
Yes. Thereby elevating the role of the interviewer.
Yes, exactly. As the most important human in the room.
Good questions are, it's hard to come up with good questions. Absolutely.
But yeah, it's like that is the foundation of my philosophy is that I am curious about the
nature of the universe. And obviously, I will die. I don't know when I'll die, but I won't live
forever. But I would like to know that we are on a path to understanding the nature of the universe
and the meaning of life and what questions to ask about the answer that is the universe.
And so if we expand the scope and scale of humanity and consciousness in general,
which includes Silicon Consciousness, then that seems like a fundamentally good thing.
Elon, like I said, I'm deeply grateful that you have spent your extremely valuable time with me
today and also that you have given millions of people hope in this difficult time, this divisive
time in this cynical time. So I hope you do continue doing what you're doing. Thank you
so much for talking today. You're welcome. Thanks for excellent questions.
Thanks for listening to this conversation with Elon Musk. To support this podcast,
please check out our sponsors in the description. And now let me leave you with some words from
Elon Musk himself. When something is important enough, you do it, even if the odds are not
in your favor. Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.